Item Data source
Election day The elections to the European Parliament (EP) will be held in all EU Member States between 6 and 9 June 2024.
The precise day of elections is set by each Member State. (Certain French voters overseas go to the polls the day
before the majority of the country.) Member States cannot publish election results until after the polls close in the
Member State whose voters are the last to vote on Sunday 9 June 2024.
Compulsory voting Voting is compulsory in only four Member States – BE, BG, LU and EL – where the legal obligation to vote applies
to both nationals and registered non-national EU citizens. (In Greece voting is not compulsory for voters over the
age of 70, for residents abroad or voters who are over 200 km from their polling station on election day.)
Number of MEPs At the 2024 European elections, a total of 720 Members will be elected to the European Parliament. This is an increase of 15 from the 705 MEPs in the outgoing Parliament.
A total of 751 Members were elected in the 2019 elections (the maximum possible under Article 14(2) TEU). Once
the 73 seats occupied by Members elected in the United Kingdom were vacated with that country’s withdrawal
from the EU, an additional 27 Members took their seats on 1 February 2020, following provision made at the 2019
elections in the 14 Member States concerned.
Voting system MEPs are elected according to national electoral systems, but these have to observe certain common provisions
established by EU law, such as proportional representation. As a general rule, voters can choose between political
parties, individual candidates or both. While in some Member States, voters can only vote for a list, without the
possibility to change the order of candidates on the list (closed list), in other Member States voters can express
their preference for one or more of the candidates (preferential voting). Depending on the degree of freedom
voters enjoy when casting their preferential vote, one can distinguish between semi-open lists, where voters can
change the position of one or all candidates on a single chosen list, and open lists, where voters can vote for candidates from different lists. Instead of a list system, some Member States use the single transferable vote (STV).
Under this system, the voter has one vote but can rank the candidates in order of their first, second, third, etc.
choice. To be elected, a candidate needs to receive a minimum number of votes.
Constituencies Whilst in the majority of Member States the national territory forms a single electoral constituency for the European elections, certain Member States have divided their territories into multiple constituencies. These are: BE,
IE, IT and PL.
Voting from abroad Most Member States allow the possibility to vote from abroad in EP elections, although in two (BG, IT) that right
applies only to citizens in another EU Member State. Some Member States require voters to pre-register with their
national electoral authorities to be eligible to vote from abroad by post or at an embassy/consulate. For some
Member States (e.g. DK), voting at embassies takes place prior to election day; and for some, postal votes may
be submitted at embassies/consulates. In some cases, voters resident abroad may vote in person in their Member
State of citizenship. In addition, most Member States make special arrangements for diplomats and military personnel serving abroad.
Amendments to the 1976 Electoral Act, adopted in 2018 based on a Parliament initiative, but not yet in force pending ratification in one Member State, state that Member States may provide for the possibilities of advance voting,
postal voting, and electronic and internet voting in elections to the European Parliament. Where they do so, they
shall adopt measures sufficient to ensure in particular the reliability of the result, the secrecy of the vote, and the
protection of personal data in accordance with applicable Union law. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that double voting in elections to the European Parliament is subject to effective, proportionate
and dissuasive penalties. Finally, Member States may take the necessary measures to allow those of their citizens
residing in third countries to vote in elections to the European Parliament.
Electoral threshold The aforementioned amendments to the 1976 Electoral Act, adopted by Council Decision of 13 July 2018, include
a measure on thresholds. The new rules will set an obligatory threshold in certain cases for the allocation of seats.
At national level, this threshold may not exceed 5 % of valid votes cast. Moreover, Member States in which the list
system is used shall set a minimum threshold for the allocation of seats for constituencies which comprise more
than 35 seats. This threshold shall not be lower than 2 %, and shall not exceed 5 % of the valid votes cast in the
constituency concerned, including a single-constituency Member State. In practice, this provision concerns only
the largest Member States. As the amendments have yet to enter into force, Member States will not have to comply
with the obligation on thresholds until at least the 2029 European elections.
NB: There is currently no electoral threshold for EP elections in Germany. This is due to a 2014 German Federal
Constitutional Court decision that declared the 3 % electoral threshold unconstitutional.
Minimum age of
candidates
The minimum age to be eligible to vote and to stand as a candidate in the European elections is established by
national law. While the age to be eligible to vote is 18 years in most Member States (except Greece, where the voting age is 17, and Belgium, Germany, Malta and Austria, where the voting age is 16), the minimum age necessary to
stand as a candidate in the European elections varies considerably, ranging from 18 to 25 years old.