=== SEGMENT 1 ===
[Summary: The European Court of Auditors (ECA) is the supreme audit institution of the European Union, established in 1975 in Luxembourg. It is recognized as one of the seven official EU institutions. The Court comprises one member from each EU member state (currently 27 members) and is supported by approximately 900 civil servants.]

The European Court of Auditors (ECA; French: Cour des comptes européenne) is the supreme audit institution of the European Union (EU). It was established in 1975 in Luxembourg and is one of the seven EU institutions.[1][2] The Court comprises one member from each EU member state (currently 27) supported by approximately 900 civil servants.  History  ECA headquarters in Luxembourg City This article is part of a series on Politics of the European Union  Member states (27) Treaties and Declarations Executive institutions Legislative institutions Judicial institutions Auditory institutions European Central Bank Other bodies Euratom Economic and Monetary Union Schengen Area European Economic Area Elections Law Policies and issues Foreign relations Defunct bodies flag European Union portal Other countries vte


=== SEGMENT 2 ===
[Summary: The European Court of Auditors (ECA) was created by the 1975 Budgetary Treaty and formally established in October 1977 as an external body, replacing two prior audit institutions. Its legal status was significantly upgraded by the Treaty of Maastricht, which designated it as the fifth EU institution and granted it new powers, including the ability to bring actions before the European Court of Justice (ECJ). The ECA's audit scope was later expanded by the Treaty of Amsterdam to cover the finances of the whole of the EU.]

See also: History of the European Union The ECA was created by the 1975 Budgetary Treaty and was formally established on 18 October 1977, holding its first session a week later. At that time the ECA was not a formal institution; it was an external body designed to audit the finances of the European Communities. It replaced two separate audit bodies, one which dealt with the finances of the European Economic Community and Euratom, and one which dealt with the European Coal and Steel Community.[3]  The ECA did not have a defined legal status until the Treaty of Maastricht when it was made the fifth institution, the first new institution since the founding of the Community. By becoming an institution it gained some new powers, such as the ability to bring actions before the European Court of Justice (ECJ). At first its audit power related only to the European Community pillar of the European Union (EU), but under the Treaty of Amsterdam it gained the full power to audit the finances of the whole of the EU.[3]


=== SEGMENT 3 ===
[Summary: The European Court of Auditors (ECA) functions as a professional external investigatory audit agency, lacking jurisdictional powers despite its name. Its primary role is to ensure the European Union budget is implemented correctly and that EU funds are spent legally and with sound management, which it does by examining paperwork and conducting spot checks. The ECA reports its findings through various reports to EU institutions and Member States, and its decisions form the basis for European Commission actions, such as suspending funds in regions where management failures are identified.]

Functions Despite its name, the ECA has no jurisdictional functions. It is rather a professional external investigatory audit agency.[4] The primary role of the ECA is to externally check if the budget of the European Union has been implemented correctly and that EU funds have been spent legally and with sound management. In doing so, the ECA checks the paperwork of all persons handling any income or expenditure of the Union and carries out spot checks. The ECA is bound to report any problems in its reports for the attention of the EU's Member States and institutions, these reports include its general and specific annual reports, as well as special reports on its performance audits.[5][6] The ECA's decision is the basis for the European Commission decisions; for example, when the ECA found problems in the management of EU funds in the regions of England, the Commission suspended funds to those regions and is prepared to fine those who do not return to acceptable standards.[7]


=== SEGMENT 4 ===
[Summary: The European Court of Auditors (ECA) maintains independence while crucial interaction with other EU institutions, particularly by presenting its annual report to the European Parliament, which uses this report to decide whether to grant discharge for the European Commission's budget execution. Historically, the Parliament's refusal to grant discharge, notably in 1999, has led to significant consequences, such as the resignation of the Santer Commission. Regarding its organization, ECA Members are nominated by EU Member States and formally appointed by the Council for renewable six-year terms, selected based on their experience in national audit bodies, qualifications, and proven independence.]

In this role, the ECA has to remain independent yet remain in touch with the other institutions; for example, a key role is the presentation of the ECA's annual report to the European Parliament. It is based on this report that the Parliament makes its decision on whether or not to sign off the European Commission's handling of the budget for that year.[5] The Parliament notably refused to do this in 1984 and 1999, the latter case forced the resignation of the Santer Commission.[8] The ECA, if satisfied, also sends assurances to the Council and Parliament that the taxpayers' money is being properly used,[5] and the ECA must be consulted before the adoption of any legislation with financial implications, but its opinion is never binding.[9]  Organisation Each EU Member State nominates a candidate to serve as an ECA Member. Members are formally appointed by the Council of the European Union after consultation with the European Parliament. They are appointed for a renewable term of six years. They are not all replaced every six years, however, as their terms do not coincide (four of the original members began with reduced terms of four years for this reason).[10] Members are chosen from people who have served in national audit bodies, who are qualified for the office and whose independence is beyond doubt. While serving in the Court, members cannot engage in any other professional activities.[11]


=== SEGMENT 5 ===
[Summary: As an independent body, the members of the European Court of Auditors (ECA) decide their own rules of procedure and organization, provided these are ratified by the Council of the European Union. Since the Treaty of Nice, the ECA has utilized specialized 'chambers' for adopting reports and opinions, and it is currently composed of five audit chambers with specific areas of responsibility. Individual members lead audits, manage the internal adoption process, and present the finalized reports to stakeholders like the European Parliament and the media.]

As the body is independent, its members are free to decide their own organisation and rules of procedure, although these must be ratified by the Council of the European Union.[12] Since the Treaty of Nice, the ECA can set up "chambers"[13] (with only a few Members each) to adopt certain types of reports or opinions. It is currently composed of five audit chambers, each of which has specific areas of responsibility. Members are responsible for leading audits and guiding reports through the internal adoption procedure. When a report has been adopted, the reporting member presents it to the institutional stakeholders such as the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, and to the media.


=== SEGMENT 6 ===
[Summary: The European Court of Auditors (ECA) is staffed by approximately 800 individuals who conduct inspections of EU institutions and recipient states, focusing on the 90% of funds managed by national authorities. Lacking its own legal powers, the ECA reports any faults found to the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF).

The institution is managed by an elected Secretary-General and led by a President, who is elected by the members via secret ballot for a renewable three-year term to chair meetings, manage operations, and represent the ECA.]

The ECA is supported by a staff of approximately 800 auditors, translators and administrators recruited as part of the European Civil Service. Auditors are divided into auditor groups which inspect and prepare draft reports for the ECA to take decisions upon. Inspections take place not only of EU institutions but of any state which receives EU funds, given that 90% of income and expenditure is managed by national authorities rather than the EU. Upon finding a fault, the ECA—possessing no legal powers of its own—informs the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF), which is the EU's anti-fraud agency.[5] The ECA is also assisted by the Secretary-General of the European Court of Auditors, elected by the College of ECA Members, who—along with general management and assistance to the President—draws up draft minutes and keeps archives of decisions, as well as ensuring the publication of reports in the Official Journal of the European Union.[14]  President The members then elect one of their members as the President of the ECA for a renewable three-year term. The election takes place by a secret ballot of those members who applied for the presidency. The duties of the President (which may be delegated) are to convene and chair the meetings of the ECA, ensuring that decisions are implemented and the departments (and other activities) are soundly managed. The President also represents the institution and appoints a representative for it in contentious proceedings.[14]


=== SEGMENT 7 ===
[Summary: The segment outlines the recent and historical leadership of the European Court of Auditors (ECA), noting that Tony Murphy (Ireland) is the current President, having taken office on October 1, 2022, succeeding Klaus-Heiner Lehne. It also provides a detailed, though partial, list of ECA members as of May 22, 2025, specifying their member state, tenure start date, assigned chamber, and current status or role within the organization.]

The current President is Tony Murphy (from Ireland) who took office on October 1, 2022. He succeeded Klaus-Heiner Lehne (Germany), elected in 2016. The previous presidents were Sir Norman Price (elected in 1977, United Kingdom), Michael Murphy (1977, Ireland), Pierre Lelong (1981, France), Marcel Mart (1984, Luxembourg), Aldo Angioi (1990, Italy), André Middelhoek (1992, Netherlands), Bernhard Friedmann (1996, Germany), Jan O. Karlsson (1999, Sweden), Juan Manuel Fabra Vallés † (2002, Spain), Hubert Weber (2006, Austria), and Vítor Manuel da Silva Caldeira (2007, Portugal).[15]  Members List of members of the European Court of Auditors as of 22 May 2025:[16]  Member state	Name	Member since	Chamber	Status  Austria	Helga Berger		1 August 2020		Chair of the Audit Quality Control Committee  Belgium	Annemie Turtelboom		1 May 2018	Chamber II	Dean  Bulgaria	Iliana Ivanova		1 January 2025	Chamber I	Member  Croatia	Ivana Maletić		15 July 2019	Chamber IV	Member  Cyprus	Lefteris Christoforou		2 November 2022	Chamber V	Member  Czech Republic	Jan Gregor		7 May 2016	Chamber V	Dean and Member for the Annual Report  Denmark	Bettina Jakobsen		1 September 2015	Chamber III	Dean  Estonia	Keit Pentus-Rosimannus		1 January 2023	Chamber I	Member  Finland	Petri Sarvamaa		1 June 2024	Chamber IV	Member  France	François-Roger Cazala		1 January 2020	Chamber IV	Member  Germany	Klaus-Heiner Lehne		1 March 2014	Chamber I	Member  Greece	Nikolaos Milionis		1 January 2014	Chamber I	Member  Hungary	Ildikó Pelczné Gáll		1 September 2017	Chamber V	Member


=== SEGMENT 8 ===
[Summary: This segment provides a continuation of the list of European Court of Auditors (ECA) members, detailing representatives from Ireland (President Tony Murphy) through Sweden, including their appointment dates and chamber assignments. The text then defines the role of the Secretary-General, who is the ECA's most senior staff member, appointed for a renewable six-year term, and responsible for managing staff, administration, budget, translation, training, and IT.]

 Ireland	Tony Murphy		1 May 2018		President  Italy	Carlo Alberto Manfredi Selvaggi		1 May 2024	Chamber II	Member  Latvia	Mihails Kozlovs		7 May 2016	Chamber IV	Dean  Lithuania	Laima Andrikienė		16 November 2022	Chamber III	Member  Luxembourg	Joëlle Elvinger		1 January 2020	Chamber I	Dean  Malta	George Marius Hyzler		1 October 2022	Chamber III	Member  Netherlands	Stef Blok		1 September 2022	Chamber II	Member  Poland	Marek Opioła		1 February 2021	Chamber III	Member  Portugal	João Leão		1 March 2024	Chamber I	Member  Romania	Viorel Ștefan		1 July 2019	Chamber III	Member  Slovakia	Katarína Kaszasová		16 October 2023	Chamber V	Member  Slovenia	Jorg Kristijan Petrovič		7 May 2022	Chamber V	Member  Spain	Alejandro Blanco Fernández		1 March 2024	Chamber II	Member  Sweden	Hans Lindblad		1 June 2024	Chamber IV	Member Secretary-general The Secretary-General is the ECA's most senior member of staff. Appointed for a renewable term of six years, he is responsible for the management of the ECA's staff and for the administration of the ECA. In addition, the Secretary-General is responsible for the budget, translation, training and information technology.


=== SEGMENT 9 ===
[Summary: The segment provides a historical list of the European Court of Auditors' (ECA) Secretaries-General, noting that Zacharias Kolias (Greece) has held the position since 2021. It also outlines staffing requirements, specifying that staff are primarily recruited through EPSO competitions and must be EU citizens. Furthermore, the ECA offers two traineeship sessions annually (starting in April and October) for a maximum of six months, which may be paid (€1600/month) or unpaid.]

List of secretaries-general 1989–1994: Patrick Everard 1994–2001: Edouard Ruppert 2001–2008: Michel Hervé (France) 2008–2009: John Speed (ad interim, United Kingdom) 2009–2020: Eduardo Ruiz Garcia (Spain) 2020–2020: Philippe Froidure (ad interim) Since 2021: Zacharias Kolias (Greece) Staffing ECA staff are mainly officials recruited via the reserve lists from general competitions organised by the European Personnel Selection Office external link (EPSO). In certain circumstances, however, the ECA may also engage temporary or contract staff. To be eligible for a post at the ECA, one must be a citizen of one of the European Union Member States.  Traineeships The ECA organises two traineeship sessions per year in areas of interest to its work, one starting in April, one in October. Traineeships are granted for a maximum of six months and are remunera


=== SEGMENT 10 ===
[Summary: The ECA publishes the results of its audits through various reports (annual, specific annual, special), opinions, and reviews, all made available on its website in official EU languages; for example, 93 reports were published in 2017. A significant point of criticism revolves around the "statement of assurance," a requirement since 1994 to certify the accountability of the entire annual budget. This process is problematic because even minor omissions necessitate the refusal of assurance for the whole budget.]

ted (€1600/month) or non-remunerated.WorkThe ECA publishes the results of its audit work in a variety of reports – annual reports, specific annual reports and special reports – depending on the type of audit. Other published products include opinions and review-based publications. In total, the ECA published 93 reports in 2017. All reports, opinions and reviews are published on the ECA's website in the official EU languages.CriticismStatement of assuranceSince 1994 the ECA has been required to provide a "statement of assurance", essentially a certificate that an entire annual budget can be accounted for. This has proved to be a problem, as even relatively minor omissions require the ECA to refuse a statement of assurance for the entire budget, even if almost all of the budget is considered reliable.[citation needed]


=== SEGMENT 11 ===
[Summary: Strict auditing standards have led to media reports claiming EU accounts are "riddled with fraud," often based on errors in paperwork rather than illegal spending, which has subsequently drawn criticism to the auditing system itself. The European Commission countered this narrative, arguing the audit bar is too high and that only 0.09% of the budget is subject to actual fraud, stressing the need to distinguish fraud from other irregularities. Additionally, the controversial 2003 dismissal of Marta Andreasen, following her criticism of procedures, has raised doubts about the integrity of the institutions.]

This has led to media reports of the EU accounts being "riddled with fraud", where issues are based on errors in paperwork even though the underlying spending was legal.[citation needed] The auditing system itself has drawn criticism from this perception. The Commission in particular has stated that the bar is too high, and that only 0.09% of the budget is subject to fraud.[17] The Commission has elsewhere stated that it is important to distinguish between fraud and other irregularities.[18] The controversial dismissal in 2003 of Marta Andreasen for her criticism of procedures in 2002 has, for some, called into doubt the integrity of the institutions.


=== SEGMENT 12 ===
[Summary: There is a significant dispute regarding the certification of EU annual accounts, with frequent claims that the external auditor has not certified them since 1994. The Court of Auditors' 2009 report found that the largest budget areas, agriculture and regional spending, were 'materially affected by error' and lacked sign-off. However, the European Commission contradicts these findings, claiming that every budget since 2007 has been signed off.]

It is frequently claimed that annual accounts have not been certified by the external auditor since 1994. In its annual report on the implementation of the 2009 EU Budget, the Court of Auditors found that the two biggest areas of the EU budget, agriculture and regional spending, have not been signed off on and remain "materially affected by error".[19] Nonetheless, the European Commission claims that every budget since 2007 has been signed off.[20]


=== SEGMENT 13 ===
[Summary: Former MEP and chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control, Terry Wynn, argued that the auditing standards imposed on the European Commission are impossible to achieve. Wynn published a report comparing EU and US auditing practices, noting that the EU focuses heavily on the legality and regularity of underlying transactions, while the US only focuses on financial information. Consequently, a failure to obtain a clean audit opinion in the US results in minimal political concern, unlike in Europe.]

Terry Wynn, an MEP who served on the Parliament's Committee on Budgetary Control and reached the position of chairman, has also backed these calls, stating that it is impossible for the Commission to achieve these standards. In a report entitled EU Budget – Public Perception & Fact – how much does it cost, where does the money go and why is it criticised so much?, Wynn cites consensus that practice in the EU differs from that in the US. In the US, the focus is on the financial information, not on the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions, 'So, other than in Europe, the political reaction in the US to the failure to obtain a clean audit opinion is only "a big yawn"'.[21]


=== SEGMENT 14 ===
[Summary: The UK's Comptroller and Auditor General contrasted UK and EU auditing practices, noting that qualifying just 13 out of 500 UK accounts could potentially lead to qualifying the entire British central government expenditure under the EU system. Despite these noted problems, the Barroso Commission stated its objective was to bring the EU budget within the Court of Auditors' limits by the end of its mandate in 2009.]

By comparison, the Comptroller and Auditor General for the United Kingdom stated that there were 500 separate accounts for the UK, and "in the last year, I qualified 13 of the 500. If I had to operate the EU system, then, because I qualify 13 accounts, I might have to qualify the whole British central government expenditure". Despite the problems, the Barroso Commission stated that it aimed to bring the budget within the Court's limits by the end of its mandate in 2009.[17]


=== SEGMENT 15 ===
[Summary: The European Court of Auditors (ECA) clarified the division of responsibility for EU budget implementation, particularly concerning Cohesion Policies. The ECA's 2010 report stated that while Member States initiate the spending process for Cohesion Policies, the European Commission bears the ultimate responsibility for the budget's correct implementation. The ECA consistently noted that the Commission holds the ultimate responsibility for the legality and regularity of all underlying transactions, citing Article 274 of the Treaty.]

The ECA made clear in its year report for 2010 that "Responsibility for the legality and regularity of spending on Cohesion Policies starts in the Member States, but the Commission bears the ultimate responsibility for the correct implementation of the budget". In previous reports, the ECA has noted that "Regardless of the method of implementation applied, the Commission bears the ultimate responsibility for the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts of the European Communities (Article 274 of the Treaty)".[19]


=== SEGMENT 16 ===
[Summary: The size of the European Court of Auditors (ECA) has faced criticism because its one-member-per-state structure caused the College of Members to expand significantly, reaching 28 members by 2013. This expansion hampered consensus, leading to a drop in annual special reports from fifteen to six between 2003 and 2005. Although proposals suggested reducing the ECA's size to five members or fewer, major treaties like the European Constitution and the Treaty of Lisbon did not enact any changes to its composition.]

SizeThe size of the ECA has also come under criticism. Owing to the one-member-per-state system, its College of Members grew from nine to twenty-eight as of 2013 (twenty-seven after completing of the United Kingdom withdrawal from the European Union/Brexit on 31 January 2020[22][23]). Attempting to get consensus in the body has thus become more difficult; this led to the number of its special reports per year shrinking from fifteen to six between 2003 and 2005, despite its staff growing by 200 over the same period. Some proposals have been for its size to be reduced to five members or just one, possibly with an advisory board with members from each member state. However, neither the European Constitution nor the Treaty of Lisbon proposed any changes to its composition, despite calls by former ECA members and MEPs to embrace change.[4][24]